

 Offshore Renewable Energy Strategy 
Key Technologies 
19 November 2020 
#EUGreenDeal
To become climate-neutral by 2050, the EU needs to further develop reliable and efficient sources of renewable energy. 
Most of our renewable energy is currently produced on land. However, there are also a range of technologies for renewable energy production at sea with considerable potential for further development. 
There are opportunities for offshore renewable energy all across Europe - from the North Sea and Baltic Sea to the Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea and the Black Sea. And all of Europe will benefit from the sustainable development of offshore energy: 
It will feed into the European grid; 
It will offer cleaner energy to citizens; 
It will reduce our dependence on energy imports; 
It will support industry across the EU. 
Examples of projects and production sites 

Offshore bottom-fixed 
Kårehamn Offshore Windfarm 
48 MW 
Offshore bottom-fixed HORNS REV 3 
406.7 MW 
Algae production for biofuels 
MacroFuels 
Market readiness envisaged for 2030 
Offshore floating solar PV 
Oceans of Energy 
17 kW (expected 50kW by end 2020) 

Manufacturing sites 
Power Converters 
Hubs & Shafts 
Tidal 
Hydroquest Ocean 1000 kW 

Floating Wind 
WindFloat Atlantic 25 MW 
Wave Energy 
ISWEC 50 kW 

Technologies supported by the Offshore Renewable Energy Strategy 

The EU offshore renewable energy strategy looks at a broad range of technologies. Some of them are already well advanced, while others are still on their way to the commercial stage. 
OFFSHORE WIND (Bottom-fixed) 
Offshore wind turbines have a greater output than onshore (as there are no trees, hills and buildings to slow down the wind). The EU is the world leader in the manufacture and use of this technology. 
OFFSHORE WIND (Floating) 
Floating wind turbines are at an earlier development stage. They show greater flexibility than bottom-fixed turbines to adapt to the direction of the wind and the different EU sea basins. 
DIRECT CURRENT TECHNOLOGIES FOR GRID 
Direct Current technologies for grid, such as High Voltage Direct Current converters and systems, can efficiently convey huge amounts of offshore renewable energy to land, enabling the seamless integration of high shares of renewables. 
WAVE ENERGY 
This new technology harnesses the power created by waves, based on the motion of floats which ride the waves. Different technologies are being developed with considerable potential for decarbonising EU islands. 
TIDAL ENERGY 
Tidal energy transforms the movement of tides into electricity – using tidal currents to drive underwater turbines. It is a fully predictable form of renewable energy that can contribute to a more stable power grid. 
SOLAR ENERGY (Floating) 
Offshore photovoltaic panels have the potential to make the most of the sun at any moment during daylight hours. This technology is still at an early stage of development. 
ALGAE FOR BIOFUELS 
Algae can be used as a source of biofuels such as biodiesel, biogas and bioethanol. This technology is still in its early development but shows a promising potential.
